he Internet is a structured, organized system. Before we discuss how
it works and its relationship to TCP/IP, we first give a brief history of
the Internet. We then define the concepts of protocols and standards and
their relationships to each other. We discuss the various organizations that
are involved in the development of Internet standards. These standards are
not developed by any specific organization, but rather through a consen-
sus of users. We discuss the mechanism through which these standards
originated and matured. Also included in this introductory chapter is a
section on Internet administrative groups.
OBJECTIVES
The chapter has several objectives:
❑
To give a brief history of the Internet.
❑
To give the definition of the two often-used terms in the discussion of
the Internet:
protocol
and
standard
.
❑
To categorize standard organizations involved in the Internet and give
a brief discussion of each.
❑
To define Internet Standards and explain the mechanism through
which these standards are developed.
❑
To discuss the Internet administration and give a brief description of
each branch.
T
3
1.1 A BRIEF HISTORY
A
network
is a group of connected, communicating devices such as computers and
printers. An internet (note the lowercase
i
) is two or more networks that can communi-
cate with each other. The most notable internet is called the
Internet
(uppercase
I
),
composed of hundreds of thousands of interconnected networks. Private individuals as
well as various organizations such as government agencies, schools, research facilities,
corporations, and libraries in more than 100 countries use the Internet. Millions
of people are users. Yet this extraordinary communication system only came into being
in 1969.
ARPANET
In the mid-1960s, mainframe computers in research organizations were stand-alone
devices. Computers from different manufacturers were unable to communicate with
one another. The
Adworks are also connected to each other by private switching stations
called peering points. Backbone ISPs normally operate at a high data rate (10 Gbps, for
example).
Regional ISPs
Regional ISPs are small ISPs that are connected to one or more backbone ISPs. They
are at the second level of hierarchy with a lesser data rate.
Local ISPs
Local ISPs provide direct service to the end users. The local ISPs can be connected
to regional ISPs or directly to backbone ISPs. Most end users are connected to the
local ISPs. Note that in this sense, a local ISP can be a company that just provides
Internet services, a corporation with a network to supply services to its own employ-
ees, or a nonprofit organization, such as a college or a university, that runs its own

1983.
TCP/IP becomes the official protocol for ARPANET.
❑
1983.
MILNET was born.
❑
1986.
NSFNET established.
❑
1990.
ARPANET decommissioned and replaced by NSFNET.
❑
1995.
NSFNET goes back to being a research network.
❑
1995.
Companies known as
Internet Service Providers (ISPs)
started.
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
7
Growth of the Internet
The Internet has grown tremendously. In just a few decades, the number of networks has
increased from tens to hundreds of thousands. Concurrently, the number of computers
connected to the networks has grown from hundreds to hundreds of millions. The Internet
is still growing. Factors that have an impact on this growth include the following:
❑
New Protocols.
New protocols need to be added and deprecated ones need to
be removed. For example, a protocol superior in many respects to IPv4
has been approved as a standard but is not yet fully implemented (see IPv6,
Chapter 27).
❑
New Technology.
New technologies are under development that will increase the
capacity of networks and provide more bandwidth to the Internet’s users.
❑
Increasing Use of Multimedia.
It is predicted that the Internet, once just a vehicle
to share data, will be used more and more for multimedia (audio and video).
1.2 PROTOCOLS AND STANDARDS
In this section, we define two widely used terms: protocols and standards. First, we
define
protocol,
which is synonymous with “rule.” Then we discuss
standards,
which
are agreed-upon rules.
Protocols
Communication between two people or two devices needs to follow some protocol. A
protocol
is a set of rules that governs communication. For example, in a face-to-face
communication between two persons, there is a set of implicit rules in each culture that
define how two persons should start the communication, how to continue the communi-
cation, and how to end the communication. Similarly, in a telephone conversation, there
are a set of rules that we need to follow. There is a rule how to make connection (dial-
ing the telephone number), how to respond to the call (picking up the receiver), how to
greet, how to let the communication flow smoothly by listening when the other party is
talking, and finally how to end the communication (hanging up).
In computer networks, communication occurs between entities in different sys-
tems. An entity is anything capable of sending or receiving information. However, two
entities cannot simply send bit streams to each other and expect to be understood. For
communication to occur, the entities must agree on a protocol. A protocol defines what
is communicated, how it is communicated, and when it is communicated. The key ele-
ments of a protocol are syntax, semantics, and timing.
❑
Syntax.
Syntax refers to the structure or format of the data, meaning the order in
which they are presented. For example, a simple protocol might expect the first
8 bits of data to be the address of the sender, the second 8 bits to be the address of
the receiver, and the rest of the stream to be the message itself. The data order is
also applied to the order of bits when they are stored or transmitted. Different com-
puters may store data in different bit orders. When these computers communicate,
this difference needs to be resolved.
8
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
❑
Semantics.
Semantics refers to the meaning of each section of bits. How is a par-
ticular pattern to be interpreted, and what action is to be taken based on that inter-
pretation? For example, does an address identify the route to be taken or the final
destination of the message?
❑
Timing.
Timing refers to two characteristics: when data should be sent and how
fast it can be sent. For example, if a sender produces data at 100 megabits per sec-
ond (100 Mbps) but the receiver can process data at only 1 Mbps, the transmission
will overload the receiver and data will be largely lost.
Standards
Standards are essential in creating and maintaining an open and competitive market for
equipment manufacturers and also in guaranteeing national and international inter-
operability of data and telecommunications technology and processes. They provide
guidelines to manufacturers, vendors, government agencies, and other service providers
to ensure the kind of interconnectivity necessary in today’s marketplace and in interna-
tional communications.
Data communication standards fall into two categories:
de facto
(meaning “by
fact”
or “by convention”) and
de jure
(meaning
“
by law” or “by regulation”).
❑
De facto.
Standards that have not been approved by an organized body but have
been adopted as standards through widespread use are
de facto standards.
De
facto standards are often established originally by manufacturers that seek to
define the functionality of a new product or technology. Examples of de facto stan-
dards are MS Office and various DVD standards.
❑
De jure.
De jure standards
are those that have been legislated by an officially rec-
ognized body.
1.3 STANDARDS ORGANIZATIONS
Standards are developed through the cooperation of standards creation committees,
forums, and government regulatory agencies.
Standards Creation Committees
While many organizations are dedicated to the establishment of standards, data com-
munications in North America rely primarily on those published by the following:
❑
International Standards Organization (ISO).
The International Standards Orga-
nization (ISO; also referred to as the International Organization for Standardiza-
tion) is a multinational body whose membership is drawn mainly from the
standards creation committees of various governments throughout the world. Cre-
ated in 1947, the ISO is an entirely voluntary organization dedicated to worldwide
agreement on international standards. With a membership that currently includes
representative bodies from many industrialized nations, it aims to facilitate the
international exchange of goods and services by providing models for compatibility,
improved quality, increased productivity, and decreased prices. The ISO is active
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 9
in developing cooperation in the realms of scientific, technological, and economic
activity. Of primary concern to this book are the ISO’s efforts in the field of infor-
mation technology, which have resulted in the creation of the Open Systems Inter-
connection (OSI) model for network communications. The United States is
represented in the ISO by ANSI.
❑ International Telecommunications Union–Telecommunications Standards Sec-
tor (ITU-T). By the early 1970s, a number of countries were defining national stan-
dards for telecommunications, but there was still little international compatibility. The
United Nations responded by forming, as part of its International Telecommunications
Union (ITU), a committee, the Consultative Committee for International Telegra-
phy and Telephony (CCITT). This committee was devoted to the research and estab-
lishment of standards for telecommunications in general and phone and data systems
in particular. On March 1, 1993, the name of this committee was changed to the Inter-
national Telecommunications Union–Telecommunications Standards Sector (ITU-T).
❑ American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Despite its name, the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) is a completely private, nonprofit corporation
not affiliated with the U.S. federal government. However, all ANSI activities are
undertaken with the welfare of the United States and its citizens occupying primary
importance. ANSI’s expressed aims include serving as the national coordinating
institution for voluntary standardization in the United States, furthering the adoption
of standards as a way of advancing the U.S. economy, and ensuring the participation
and protection of the public interests. ANSI members include professional societies,
industry associations, governmental and regulatory bodies, and consumer groups.
❑ Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). The Institute of Electri-
cal and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is the largest professional engineering society
in the world. International in scope, it aims to advance theory, creativity, and product
quality in the fields of electrical engineering, electronics, and radio as well as in all
related branches of engineering. As one of its goals, the IEEE oversees the develop-
ment and adoption of international standards for computing and communication.
❑ Electronic Industries Association (EIA). Aligned with ANSI, the Electronic
Industries Association (EIA) is a nonprofit organization devoted to the promotion
of electronics manufacturing concerns. Its activities include public awareness edu-
cation and lobbying efforts in addition to standards development. In the field of
information technology, the EIA has made significant contributions by defining
physical connection interfaces and electronic signaling specifications for data
communications.
❑ World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Tim Berners-Lee founded this consortium
at Massachusetts Institutue of Technology Laboratory for Computer Science. It
was founded to provide computability in industry for new standards. W3C has cre-
ated regional offices around the world.
❑ Open Mobile Alliance (OMA). The standards organizaion OMA was created to
gather different forums in computer networking and wireless technology under the
umbrella of one single authority. Its mission is to provide unified standards for
application protocols.
10 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Forums
Telecommunications technology development is moving faster than the ability of stan-
dards committees to ratify standards. Standards committees are procedural bodies and
by nature slow moving. To accommodate the need for working models and agreements
and to facilitate the standardization process, many special-interest groups have devel-
oped forums made up of representatives from interested corporations. The forums
work with universities and users to test, evaluate, and standardize new technologies. By
concentrating their efforts on a particular technology, the forums are able to speed
acceptance and use of those technologies in the telecommunications community. The
forums present their conclusions to the standards bodies. Some important forums for
the telecommunications industry include the following:
❑ Frame Relay Forum. The Frame Relay Forum was formed by Digital Equipment Cor-
poration, Northern Telecom, Cisco, and StrataCom to promote the acceptance and
implementation of Frame Relay. Today, it has around 40 members representing North
America, Europe, and the Pacific Rim. Issues under review include flow control, encap-
sulation, translation, and multicasting. The forum’s results are submitted to the ISO.
❑ ATM Forum. The ATM Forum promotes the acceptance and use of Asynchronous
Transfer Mode (ATM) technology. The ATM Forum is made up of customer prem-
ises equipment (e.g., PBX systems) vendors and central office (e.g., telephone
exchange) providers. It is concerned with the standardization of services to ensure
interoperability.
❑ Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) Forum. The UPnP forum is a computer net-
work forum that supports and promotes simplifying the implementation of
networks by creating zero-configuration networking devices. A UPnP-compatible
device can join a network without any configuration.
Regulatory Agencies
All communications technology is subject to regulation by government agencies such
as the Federal Communications Commission in the United States. The purpose of these
agencies is to protect the public interest by regulating radio, television, and wire/cable
communications.
❑ Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) has authority over interstate and international commerce as it
relates to communications.
1.4 INTERNET STANDARDS
An Internet standard is a thoroughly tested specification that is useful to and adhered to
by those who work with the Internet. It is a formalized regulation that must be followed.
There is a strict procedure by which a specification attains Internet standard status. A spec-
ification begins as an Internet draft. An Internet draft is a working document (a work in
progress) with no official status and a six-month lifetime. Upon recommendation from the
The websites for the above organizations are given in Appendix G.
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
11
Internet authorities, a draft may be published as a
Request for Comment (RFC).
Each
RFC is edited, assigned a number, and made available to all interested parties.
RFCs go through maturity levels and are categorized according to their require-
ment level.
Maturity Levels
An RFC, during its lifetime, falls into one of six
maturity levels:
proposed standard, draft
standard, Internet standard, historic, experimental, and informational (see Figure 1.2).
Proposed Standard
A proposed standard is a specification that is stable, well understood, and of sufficient
interest to the Internet community. At this level, the specification is usually tested and
implemented by several different groups.
Draft Standard
A proposed standard is elevated to draft standard status after at least two successful indepen-
dent and interoperable implementations. Barring difficulties, a draft standard, with modifica-
tions if specific problems are encountered, normally becomes an Internet standard.
Internet Standard
A draft standard reaches Internet standard status after demonstrations of successful
implementation.
Historic
The historic RFCs are significant from a historical perspective. They either have been
superseded by later specifications or have never passed the necessary maturity levels to
become an Internet standard.
Experimental
An RFC classified as experimental describes work related to an experimental situation
that does not affect the operation of the Internet. Such an RFC should not be imple-
mented in any functional Internet service.
Figure 1.2
Maturity levels of an RFC
Proposed standard Experimental Informational
Draft standard
Six months and two tries
Four months and two tries
Internet standard
Historic
Internet draft
12
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Informational
An RFC classified as informational contains general, historical, or tutorial information
related to the Internet. It is usually written by someone in a non-Internet organization,
such as a vendor.
Requirement Levels
RFCs are classified into five
requirement levels:
required, recommended, elective,
limited use, and not recommended (see Figure 1.3).
Required
An RFC is labeled
required
if it must be implemented by all Internet systems to achieve
minimum conformance. For example, IP (Chapter 7) and ICMP (Chapter 9) are
required protocols.
Recommended
An RFC labeled
recommended
is not required for minimum conformance; it is recom-
mended because of its usefulness. For example, FTP (Chapter 21) and TELNET
(Chapter 20) are recommended protocols.
Elective
An RFC labeled
elective
is not required and not recommended. However, a system can
use it for its own benefit.
Limited Use
An RFC labeled
limited
use
should be used only in limited situations. Most of the
experimental RFCs fall under this category.
Not Recommended
An RFC labeled
not recommended
is inappropriate for general use. Normally a historic
(deprecated) RFC may fall under this category.
Figure 1.3
Requirement levels of an RFC
RFCs can be found at http://www.rfc-editor.org.
Required
Recommended
Requirement levels Elective
Limited use
Not recommended
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
13
1.5 INTERNET ADMINISTRATION
The Internet, with its roots primarily in the research domain, has evolved and gained
a broader user base with significant commercial activity. Various groups that coordinate
Internet issues have guided this growth and development. Appendix G gives the addresses,
e-mail addresses, and telephone numbers for some of these groups. Figure 1.4
shows the general organization of Internet administration.
Internet Society (ISOC)
The
Internet Society (ISOC)
is an international, nonprofit organization formed in
1992 to provide support for the Internet standards process. ISOC accomplishes this
through maintaining and supporting other Internet administrative bodies such as IAB,
IETF, IRTF, and IANA (see the following sections). ISOC also promotes research and
other scholarly activities relating to the Internet.
Internet Architecture Board (IAB)
The
Internet Architecture Board (IAB)
is the technical advisor to the ISOC. The
main purposes of the IAB are to oversee the continuing development of the TCP/IP
Protocol Suite and to serve in a technical advisory capacity to research members of the
Internet community. IAB accomplishes this through its two primary components, the
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).
Another responsibility of the IAB is the editorial management of the RFCs, described
earlier in this chapter. IAB is also the external liaison between the Internet and other
standards organizations and forums.
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
The
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
is a forum of working groups man-
aged by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). IETF is responsible for
identifying operational problems and proposing solutions to these problems. IETF
Figure 1.4
Internet administration
IETF IRTF
RG RG
RG RG
IESG IRSG
Area Area
WG WG WG WG
ISOC
IAB
14 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
also develops and reviews specifications intended as Internet standards. The working
groups are collected into areas, and each area concentrates on a specific topic. Cur-
rently nine areas have been defined, although this is by no means a hard and fast
number. The areas are:
❑ Applications
❑ Internet protocols
❑ Routing
❑ Operations
❑ User services
❑ Network management
❑ Transport
❑ Internet protocol next generation (IPng)
❑ Security
Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) is a forum of working groups managed by
the Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG). IRTF focuses on long-term research top-
ics related to Internet protocols, applications, architecture, and technology.
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) and Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), supported by the U.S. govern-
ment, was responsible for the management of Internet domain names and addresses
until October 1998. At that time the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), a private nonprofit corporation managed by an international
board, assumed IANA operations.
Network Information Center (NIC)
The Network Information Center (NIC) is responsible for collecting and distributing
information about TCP/IP protocols.
1.6 FURTHER READING
For more details about subjects discussed in this chapter, we recommend the following
books and websites. The items enclosed in brackets refer to the reference list at the end
of the book.
The addresses and websites for Internet organizations can be found in Appendix G.
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
15
Books and Papers
Several books and papers give an easy but thorough coverage of Internet history includ-
ing [Seg 98], [Lei et al. 98], [Kle 04], [Cer 89], and [Jen et al. 86].
Websites
The following websites give more information about topics discussed in this chapter.
1.7 KEY TERMS
1.8 SUMMARY
❑
A network is a group of connected, communicating devices. An internet is two or
more networks that can communicate with each other. The most notable internet is
called the Internet, composed of hundreds of thousands of interconnected networks.
❑
The history of internetworking started with ARPA in the mid-1960s. The birth of
the Internet can be associated with the work of Cerf and Kahn and the invention
ietf.org The site of IETF
w3c.org The site of W3C standard organization
Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA)
Internet draft
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
ANSNET Internet Service Provider (ISP)
ARPANET Internet Society (ISOC)
ATM Forum Internet standard
Consultative Committee for International
Telegraphy and Telephony (CCITT)
Internet Protocol (IP)
maturity levels
CSNET MILNET
de facto standards network
de jure standards network access points (NAPs)
Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Network Information Center (NIC)
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) NSFNET
Frame Relay Forum protocol
Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE)
Open Mobile Alliance (OMA)
Request for Comment (RFC)
International Standards Organization (ISO) requirement levels
International Telecommunications
Union–Telecommunications Standards
Sector (ITUT)
semantics
syntax
timing
Internet Architecture Board (IAB) Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) Forum
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN)
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
16 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
of a gateway to connect networks. In 1977, the Defense Communication Agency
(DCA) took the responsibility of the ARPANET and used two protocols called
TCP and IP to handle the routing of datagrams between individual networks.
MILNET, CSNET, NSFNET, ANSNET, are all evolved from the ARPANET.
❑ The Internet today is made up of many wide and local area networks joined by
connecting devices and switching stations. Today most end users who want Inter-
net connection use the services of Internet service providers (ISPs). There are
backbone ISPs, regional ISPs, and local ISPs.
❑ A protocol is a set of rules that governs communication. The key elements of a pro-
tocol are syntax, semantics, and timing. In computer networks, communication
occurs between entities in different systems. For communication to occur, the enti-
ties must agree on a protocol. A protocol defines what is communicated, how it is
communicated, and when it is communicated.
❑ Standards are essential in creating and maintaining an open and competitive mar-
ket. They provide guidelines to manufacturers, vendors, government agencies, and
other service providers to ensure the kind of interconnectivity necessary in today’s
marketplace and in international communications. Data communication standards
fall into two categories: de facto and de jure.
❑ An Internet standard is a thoroughly tested specification that is useful to and
adhered to by those who work with the Internet. An Internet draft is a working doc-
ument (a work in progress) with no official status and a six-month lifetime. Upon
recommendation from the Internet authorities, a draft may be published as a
Request for Comment (RFC). Each RFC is edited, assigned a number, and made
available to all interested parties. RFCs go through maturity levels and are catego-
rized according to their requirement level.
❑ The Internet administration has evolved with the Internet. ISOC promotes research
and activities. IAB is the technical advisor to the ISOC. IETF is a forum of work-
ing groups responsible for operational problems. IRTF is a forum of working
groups focusing on long-term research topics. ICANN is responsible for the man-
agement of Internet domain names and addresses. NIC is responsible for collecting
and distributing information about TCP/IP protocols.
1.9 PRACTICE SET
Exercises
1. Use the Internet to find the number of RFCs.
2. Use the Internet to find the subject matter of RFCs 2418 and 1603.
3. Use the Internet to find the RFC that discusses the IRTF working group guidelines
and procedures.
4. Use the Internet to find two examples of historic RFCs.
5. Use the Internet to find two examples of experimental RFCs.
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 17
6. Use the Internet to find two examples of informational RFCs.
7. Use the Internet to find the RFC that discusses the FTP application.
8. Use the Internet to find the RFC for the Internet Protocol (IP).
9. Use the Internet to find the RFC for the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).
10. Use the Internet to find the RFC that details the Internet standards process.
Research Activities
11. Research and find three standards developed by ITU-T.
12. Research and find three standards developed by ANSI.
13. EIA has developed some standards for interfaces. Research and find two of these
standards. What is EIA 232?
14. Research and find three regulations devised by FCC concerning AM and FM
transmission.
CHAPTER
2
18
2
The OSI Model and
the TCP/IP Protocol Suite
he layered model that dominated data communication and network-
ing literature before 1990 was the
Open Systems Interconnection
(OSI) model.
Everyone believed that the OSI model would become the
ultimate standard for data communications—but this did not happen. The
TCP/IP protocol suite
became the dominant commercial architecture
because it was used and tested extensively in the Internet; the OSI model
was never fully implemented.
In this chapter, we first briefly discuss the OSI model and then we
concentrate on TCP/IP as a protocol suite.
OBJECTIVES
The chapter has several objectives:
❑
To discuss the idea of multiple layering in data communication and
networking and the interrelationship between layers.
❑
To discuss the OSI model and its layer architecture and to show the
interface between the layers.
❑
To briefly discuss the functions of each layer in the OSI model.
❑
To introduce the TCP/IP protocol suite and compare its layers with
the ones in the OSI model.
❑
To show the functionality of each layer in the TCP/IP protocol with
some examples.
❑
To discuss the addressing mechanism used in some layers of the
TCP/IP protocol suite for the delivery of a message from the source
to the destination.
T
19
2.1 PROTOCOL LAYERS
In Chapter 1, we discussed that a protocol is required when two entities need to com-
municate. When communication is not simple, we may divide the complex task of
communication into several layers. In this case, we may need several protocols, one for
each layer.
Let us use a scenario in communication in which the role of protocol layering may
be better understood. We use two examples. In the first example, communication is so
simple that it can occur in only one layer. In the second example, we need three layers.
Example 2.1
Assume Maria and Ann are neighbors with a lot of common ideas. However, Maria speaks only
Spanish, and Ann speaks only English. Since both have learned the sign language in their child-
hood, they enjoy meeting in a cafe a couple of days per week and exchange their ideas using
signs. Occasionally, they also use a bilingual dictionary. Communication is face to face and hap-
pens in one layer as shown in Figure 2.1.
Example 2.2
Now assume that Ann has to move to another town because of her job. Before she moves, the
two meet for the last time in the same cafe. Although both are sad, Maria surprises Ann when
she opens a packet that contains two small machines. The first machine can scan and transform
a letter in English to a secret code or vice versa. The other machine can scan and translate a
letter in Spanish to the same secret code or vice versa. Ann takes the first machine; Maria keeps
the second one. The two friends can still communicate using the secret code, as shown in
Figure 2.2.
Communication between Maria and Ann happens as follows. At the third layer, Maria writes
a letter in Spanish, the language she is comfortable with. She then uses the translator machine
that scans the letter and creates a letter in the secret code. Maria then puts the letter in an envelop
and drops it to the post office box. The letter is carried by the post office truck to the post office of
the city where Ann lives now. In the post office, the letter is delivered to the Ann residence. Ann
uses her own machine to change the secret code to a letter in the English language. The commu-
nication from Ann to Maria uses the same process, but in the reverse direction. The communica-
tion in both directions is carried in the secret code, a language that neither Maria nor Ann
understands, but through the layered communication, they can exchange ideas.
Figure 2.1
Example 2.1
Maria Ann
Layer 1
Signs
Layer 1
20
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Hierarchy
Using Example 2.2, there are three different activities at the sender site and another
three activities at the receiver site. The task of transporting the letter between the
sender and the receiver is done by the carrier. Something that is not obvious immedi-
ately is that the tasks must be done in the order given in the hierarchy. At the sender
site, the letter must be written, translated to secret code, and dropped in the mailbox
before being picked up by the letter carrier and delivered to the post office. At the
receiver site, the letter must be dropped in the recipient mailbox before being picked
up and read by the recipient.
Services
Each layer at the sending site uses the services of the layer immediately below it. The
sender at the higher layer uses the services of the middle layer. The middle layer uses
the services of the lower layer. The lower layer uses the services of the carrier.
2.2 THE OSI MODEL
Established in 1947, the
International Standards Organization (ISO)
is a multi-
national body dedicated to worldwide agreement on international standards. Almost
three-fourths of countries in the world are represented in the ISO. An ISO standard that
covers all aspects of network communications is the Open Systems Interconnection
(OSI) model. It was first introduced in the late 1970s.
An
open system
is a set of protocols that allows any two different systems to com-
municate regardless of their underlying architecture. The purpose of the OSI model is
Figure 2.2
Example 2.2
ISO is the organization; OSI is the model.
Maria Ann
Translator
Post Office
Layer 3 Layer 3
Layer 2 Layer 2
Layer 1 Layer 1
Spanish
Secret code
Secret code
English
US Post US Post
Translator
Post Office
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
21
to show how to facilitate communication between different systems without requiring
changes to the logic of the underlying hardware and software. The OSI model is not a
protocol; it is a model for understanding and designing a network architecture that is
flexible, robust, and interoperable. The OSI model was intended to be the basis for the
creation of the protocols in the OSI stack.
The OSI model is a layered framework for the design of network systems that
allows communication between all types of computer systems. It consists of seven sep-
arate but related layers, each of which defines a part of the process of moving information
across a network (see Figure 2.3). Understanding the fundamentals of the OSI model
provides a solid basis for exploring data communications.
Layered Architecture
The OSI model is composed of seven ordered layers: physical (layer 1), data link
(layer 2), network (layer 3), transport (layer 4), session (layer 5), presentation (layer 6),
and application (layer 7). Figure 2.4 shows the layers involved when a message is sent
from device A to device B. As the message travels from A to B, it may pass through
many intermediate nodes. These intermediate nodes usually involve only the first three
layers of the OSI model.
In developing the model, the designers distilled the process of transmitting data to
its most fundamental elements. They identified which networking functions had related
uses and collected those functions into discrete groups that became the layers. Each
layer defines a family of functions distinct from those of the other layers. By defining
and localizing functionality in this fashion, the designers created an architecture that is
both comprehensive and flexible. Most important, the OSI model allows complete
interoperability between otherwise incompatible systems.
Within a single machine, each layer calls upon the services of the layer just below
it. Layer 3, for example, uses the services provided by layer 2 and provides services for
layer 4. Between machines, layer
x
on one machine logically communicates with layer
x
on another machine. This communication is governed by an agreed-upon series of rules
and conventions called protocols.
Figure 2.3
The OSI model
Transport
Application
Presentation
Session
Network
Data link
Physical Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
Layer 5
Layer 6
Layer 7
22
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Layer-to-Layer Communication
In Figure 2.4, device A sends a message to device B (through intermediate nodes). At
the sending site, the message is moved down from layer 7 to layer 1. At layer 1 the
entire package is converted to a form that can be transferred to the receiving site. At the
receiving site, the message is moved up from layer 1 to layer 7.
Interfaces between Layers
The passing of the data and network information down through the layers of the send-
ing device and back up through the layers of the receiving device is made possible by
an
interface
between each pair of adjacent layers. Each interface defines what informa-
tion and services a layer must provide for the layer above it. Well-defined interfaces and
layer functions provide modularity to a network. As long as a layer provides the
expected services to the layer above it, the specific implementation of its functions can
be modified or replaced without requiring changes to the surrounding layers.
Organization of the Layers
The seven layers can be thought of as belonging to three subgroups. Layers 1, 2, and
3—physical, data link, and network—are the network support layers; they deal with
the physical aspects of moving data from one device to another (such as electrical
specifications, physical connections, physical addressing, and transport timing and
reliability). Layers 5, 6, and 7—session, presentation, and application—can be
thought of as the user support layers; they allow interoperability among unrelated
software systems. Layer 4, the transport layer, links the two subgroups and ensures
that what the lower layers have transmitted is in a form that the upper layers can use.
Figure 2.4
OSI layers
Application
Layer-to-layer communication (7th layer)
Layer-to-layer communication (6th layer)
Layer-to-layer communication (5th layer)
Layer-to-layer communication (4th layer)
Intermediate
node
7-6 interface
Presentation
6-5 interface
Session
5-4 interface
Transport
4-3 interface
Network
3-2 interface
Data link
2-1 interface
Physical
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Application
7-6 interface
Presentation
6-5 interface
Session
5-4 interface
Transport
4-3 interface
Network
3-2 interface
Data link
2-1 interface
Physical
Network
Data link
Physical
Network
Data link
Physical
Physical communication
3rd
2nd
1st
3rd
2nd
1st
3rd
2nd
1st
Device A Device B
Intermediate
node
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
23
The upper OSI layers are almost always implemented in software; lower layers are a
combination of hardware and software, except for the physical layer, which is mostly
hardware.
In Figure 2.5, which gives an overall view of the OSI layers, D7 data means the
data unit at layer 7, D6 data means the data unit at layer 6, and so on. The process
starts at layer 7 (the application layer), then moves from layer to layer in descending,
sequential order. At each layer, a header can be added to the data unit. At layer 2, a
trailer may also be added. When the formatted data unit passes through the physical
layer (layer 1), it is changed into an electromagnetic signal and transported along a
physical link.
Upon reaching its destination, the signal passes into layer 1 and is transformed
back into digital form. The data units then move back up through the OSI layers. As
each block of data reaches the next higher layer, the headers and trailers attached to it at
the corresponding sending layer are removed, and actions appropriate to that layer are
taken. By the time it reaches layer 7, the message is again in a form appropriate to the
application and is made available to the recipient.
Encapsulation
Figure 2.5 reveals another aspect of data communications in the OSI model: encapsula-
tion. A packet at level 7 is encapsulated in the packet at level 6. The whole packet at
level 6 is encapsulated in a packet at level 5, and so on.
In other words, the data part of a packet at level
N
is carrying the whole packet
(data and overhead) from level
N
+
1. The concept is called encapsulation because level
N
is not aware what part of the encapsulated packet is data and what part is the header
or trailer. For level
N
, the whole packet coming from level
N
+
1 is treated as one
integral unit.
Figure 2.5
An exchange using the OSI model
D7
D6 H6
H7
H5
H4
H3
H2 T2
D5
D4
D3
D2
010101010101101010000010000 H1
D7
D6 H6
H7
H5
H4
H3
H2 T2
D5
D4
D3
D2
010101010101101010000010000 H1
Transmission medium
24
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Layers in the OSI Model
In this section we briefly describe the functions of each layer in the OSI model.
Physical Layer
The
physical layer
coordinates the functions required to carry a bit stream over a physi-
cal medium. It deals with the mechanical and electrical specifications of the interface and
transmission media. It also defines the procedures and functions that physical devices
and interfaces have to perform for transmission to occur.
The physical layer is also concerned with the following:
❑
Physical characteristics of interfaces and media.
The physical layer defines the
characteristics of the interface between the devices and the transmission media. It
also defines the type of transmission media (see Chapter 3).
❑
Representation of bits.
The physical layer data consists of a stream of
bits
(sequence of 0s or 1s) with no interpretation. To be transmitted, bits must be
encoded into signals—electrical or optical. The physical layer defines the type of
encoding
(how 0s and 1s are changed to signals).
❑
Data rate.
The
transmission rate
—the number of bits sent each second—is also
defined by the physical layer. In other words, the physical layer defines the dura-
tion of a bit, which is how long it lasts.
❑
Synchronization of bits.
The sender and receiver must not only use the same bit
rate but must also be synchronized at the bit level. In other words, the sender and
the receiver clocks must be synchronized.
❑
Line configuration.
The physical layer is concerned with the connection of
devices to the media. In a
point-to-point configuration,
two devices are con-
nected together through a dedicated link. In a
multipoint configuration,
a link is
shared between several devices.
❑
Physical topology.
The physical topology defines how devices are connected to
make a network. Devices can be connected using a
mesh topology
(every device
connected to every other device), a
star topology
(devices are connected through a
central device), a
ring topology
(each device is connected to the next, forming a
ring), or a
bus topology
(every device on a common link).
❑
Transmission mode.
The physical layer also defines the direction of transmission
between two devices: simplex, half-duplex, or full-duplex. In the
simplex mode,
only one device can send; the other can only receive. The simplex mode is a one-
way communication. In the
half-duplex mode,
two devices can send and receive,
but not at the same time. In a
full-duplex
(or simply duplex)
mode,
two devices
can send and receive at the same time.
The physical layer is responsible for moving individual bits from one
(node) to the next.
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
25
Data Link Layer
The
data link layer
transforms the physical layer, a raw transmission facility, to a reli-
able link. It makes the physical layer appear error-free to the upper layer (network
layer). Other responsibilities of the data link layer include the following:
❑
Framing.
The data link layer divides the stream of bits received from the network
layer into manageable data units called
frames
.
❑
Physical addressing.
If frames are to be distributed to different systems on the
network, the data link layer adds a header to the frame to define the sender and/or
receiver of the frame. If the frame is intended for a system outside the sender’s
network, the receiver address is the address of the connecting device that connects
the network to the next one.
❑
Flow control.
If the rate at which the data is absorbed by the receiver is less than
the rate produced at the sender, the data link layer imposes a flow control mecha-
nism to prevent overwhelming the receiver.
❑
Error control.
The data link layer adds reliability to the physical layer by adding
mechanisms to detect and retransmit damaged or lost frames. It also uses a mecha-
nism to recognize duplicate frames. Error control is normally achieved through a
trailer added to the end of the frame.
❑
Access control.
When two or more devices are connected to the same link, data
link layer protocols are necessary to determine which device has control over the
link at any given time.
Network Layer
The
network layer
is responsible for the source-to-destination delivery of a packet,
possibly across multiple networks (links). Whereas the data link layer oversees the
delivery of the packet between two systems on the same network (link), the network
layer ensures that each packet gets from its point of origin to its final destination.
If two systems are connected to the same link, there is usually no need for a net-
work layer. However, if the two systems are attached to different networks (links) with
connecting devices between the networks (links), there is often a need for the network
layer to accomplish source-to-destination delivery. Other responsibilities of the net-
work layer include the following:
❑
Logical addressing.
The physical addressing implemented by the data link layer
handles the addressing problem locally. If a packet passes the network boundary,
we need another addressing system to help distinguish the source and destination
systems. The network layer adds a header to the packet coming from the upper
layer that, among other things, includes the logical addresses of the sender and
receiver.
❑
Routing.
When independent networks or links are connected together to create
internetworks
(network of networks) or a large network, the connecting devices
(called
routers
or
switches
) route or switch the packets to their final destination.
One of the functions of the network layer is to provide this mechanism.
26
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Transport Layer
The
transport layer
is responsible for
process-to-process
delivery
of the entire mes-
sage. A process is an application program running on the host. Whereas the network
layer oversees
source-to-destination delivery
of individual packets, it does not recog-
nize any relationship between those packets. It treats each one independently, as though
each piece belonged to a separate message, whether or not it does. The transport layer,
on the other hand, ensures that the whole message arrives intact and in order, oversee-
ing both error control and flow control at the source-to-destination level. Other respon-
sibilities of the transport layer include the following:
❑
Service-point addressing.
Computers often run several programs at the same
time. For this reason, source-to-destination delivery means delivery not only from
one computer to the next but also from a specific process (running program) on
one computer to a specific process (running program) on the other. The transport
layer header must therefore include a type of address called a
service-point
address
(or port address). The network layer gets each packet to the correct com-
puter; the transport layer gets the entire message to the correct process on that
computer.
❑
Segmentation and reassembly.
A message is divided into transmittable segments,
with each segment containing a sequence number. These numbers enable the trans-
port layer to reassemble the message correctly upon arriving at the destination and
to identify and replace packets that were lost in transmission.
❑
Connection control.
The transport layer can be either connectionless or connection-
oriented. A connectionless transport layer treats each segment as an independent
packet and delivers it to the transport layer at the destination machine. A connection-
oriented transport layer makes a connection with the transport layer at the destina-
tion machine first before delivering the packets. After all the data are transferred,
the connection is terminated.
❑
Flow control.
Like the data link layer, the transport layer is responsible for flow
control. However, flow control at this layer is performed end to end rather than
across a single link.
❑ Error control. Like the data link layer, the transport layer is responsible for error
control. However, error control at this layer is performed process-to-process rather
than across a single link. The sending transport layer makes sure that the entire
message arrives at the receiving transport layer without error (damage, loss, or
duplication). Error correction is usually achieved through retransmission.
Session Layer
The services provided by the first four layers (physical, data link, network and transport)
are not sufficient for some processes. The session layer is the network dialog controller.
It establishes, maintains, and synchronizes the interaction between communicating
systems. Specific responsibilities of the session layer include the following:
❑ Dialog control. The session layer allows two systems to enter into a dialog. It
allows the communication between two processes to take place in either half-
duplex (one way at a time) or full-duplex (two ways at a time) mode.
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE 27
❑ Synchronization. The session layer allows a process to add checkpoints (synchro-
nization points) into a stream of data. For example, if a system is sending a file of
2,000 pages, it is advisable to insert checkpoints after every 100 pages to ensure
that each 100-page unit is received and acknowledged independently. In this case,
if a crash happens during the transmission of page 523, the only pages that need to
be resent after system recovery are pages 501 to 523. Pages previous to 501 need
not be resent.
Presentation Layer
The presentation layer is concerned with the syntax and semantics of the information
exchanged between two systems. Specific responsibilities of the presentation layer
include the following:
❑ Translation. The processes (running programs) in two systems are usually exchang-
ing information in the form of character strings, numbers, and so on. The informa-
tion should be changed to bit streams before being transmitted. Because different
computers use different encoding systems, the presentation layer is responsible for
interoperability between these different encoding methods. The presentation layer
at the sender changes the information from its sender-dependent format into a
common format. The presentation layer at the receiving machine changes the com-
mon format into its receiver-dependent format.
❑ Encryption. To carry sensitive information a system must be able to assure pri-
vacy. Encryption means that the sender transforms the original information to
another form and sends the resulting message out over the network. Decryption
reverses the original process to transform the message back to its original form.
❑ Compression. Data compression reduces the number of bits contained in the
information. Data compression becomes particularly important in the transmission
of multimedia such as text, audio, and video.
Application Layer
The application layer enables the user, whether human or software, to access the net-
work. It provides user interfaces and support for services such as electronic mail,
remote file access and transfer, shared database management, and other types of distrib-
uted information services. Specific services provided by the application layer include
the following:
❑ Network virtual terminal. A network virtual terminal is a software version of a
physical terminal and allows a user to log on to a remote host. To do so, the appli-
cation creates a software emulation of a terminal at the remote host. The user’s
computer talks to the software terminal, which, in turn, talks to the host, and vice
versa. The remote host believes it is communicating with one of its own terminals
and allows you to log on.
❑ File transfer, access, and management (FTAM). This application allows a user
to access files in a remote host (to make changes or read data), to retrieve files from
a remote computer for use in the local computer, and to manage or control files in a
remote computer locally.
28 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
❑ E-mail services. This application provides the basis for e-mail forwarding and
storage.
❑ Directory services. This application provides distributed database sources and
access for global information about various objects and services.
Summary of OSI Layers
Figure 2.6 shows a summary of duties for each layer. In the next section, we describe
how some of these duties are mixed and spread into five categories in the TCP/IP proto-
col suite.
2.3 TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
The TCP/IP protocol suite was developed prior to the OSI model. Therefore, the
layers in the TCP/IP protocol suite do not match exactly with those in the OSI model.
The original TCP/IP protocol suite was defined as four software layers built upon the
hardware. Today, however, TCP/IP is thought of as a five-layer model with the layers
named similarly to the ones in the OSI model. Figure 2.7 shows both configurations.
Comparison between OSI and TCP/IP Protocol Suite
When we compare the two models, we find that two layers, session and presentation,
are missing from the TCP/IP protocol suite. These two layers were not added to the
TCP/IP protocol suite after the publication of the OSI model. The application layer in
the suite is usually considered to be the combination of three layers in the OSI model,
as shown in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.6 Summary of OSI layers
Physical
To transmit bits over a medium; to provide
mechanical and electrical specifications
Data link
To organize bits into frames; to provide
hop-to-hop delivery
Application To allow access to network resources
Session To establish, manage, and terminate sessions
Presentation To translate, encrypt, and compress data
To move packets from source to destination;
to provide internetworking
Network
To provide reliable process-to-process
message delivery and error recovery
Transport
1
2
7
5
6
3
4
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE 29
Two reasons were mentioned for this decision. First, TCP/IP has more than one
transport-layer protocol. Some of the functionalities of the session layer are available in
some of the transport layer protocols. Second, the application layer is not only one
piece of software. Many applications can be developed at this layer. If some of the
functionalities mentioned in the session and presentation are needed for a particular
application, it can be included in the development of that piece of software.
TCP/IP is a hierarchical protocol made up of interactive modules, each of which
provides a specific functionality, but the modules are not necessarily interdependent.
Whereas the OSI model specifies which functions belong to each of its layers, the lay-
ers of the TCP/IP protocol suite contain relatively independent protocols that can be
mixed and matched, depending on the needs of the system. The term hierarchical
means that each upper level protocol is supported by one or more lower level protocols.
Figure 2.7 Layers in the TCP/IP Protocol Suite
Figure 2.8 TCP/IP and OSI model
Application
Internet
Network Interface
Hardware Devices Layer 1
a. Original layers b. Layers used in this book
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
Layer 5
Transport
Application
Network
Data Link
Physical
Transport
Physical
Physical
OSI Model
TCP/IP Protocol Suite
Underlying
LAN and WAN
technology
Internet Protocol
and some helping
protocols
Several transport
protocols
Several application
protocols
Session
Presentation
Application
Application
Data link
Data link
Network Network
Transport Transport
30 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
Layers in the TCP/IP Protocol Suite
In this section, we briefly discuss the purpose of each layer in the TCP/IP protocol suite.
When we study the purpose of each layer, it is easier to think of a private internet,
instead of the global Internet. We assume that we want to use the TCP/IP suite in a small,
private internet. Such an internet is made up of several small networks, which we call
links. A link is a network that allows a set of computers to communicate with each other.
For example, if all computers in an office are wired together, the connection makes a
link. If several computers belonging to a private company are connected via a satellite
channel, the connection is a link. A link, as we discussed in Chapter 3, can be a LAN
(local area network) serving a small area or a WAN (wide area network) serving a larger
area. We also assume that different links are connected together by devices called rout-
ers or switches that route the data to reach their final destinations. Figure 2.9 shows our
imaginary internet that is used to show the purpose of each layer. We have six links and
four routers (R1 to R4). We have shown only two computers, A and B.
Physical Layer
TCP/IP does not define any specific protocol for the physical layer. It supports all of the
standard and proprietary protocols. At this level, the communication is between two hops
or nodes, either a computer or router. The unit of communication is a single bit. When the
connection is established between the two nodes, a stream of bits is flowing between
them. The physical layer, however, treats each bit individually. Figure 2.10 shows the
communication between nodes. We are assuming that at this moment the two computers
have discovered that the most efficient way to communicate with each other is via routers
R1, R3, and R4. How this decision is made is the subject of some future chapters.
Note that if a node is connected to n links, it needs n physical-layer protocols, one for
each link. The reason is that different links may use different physical-layer protocols. The
figure, however, shows only physical layers involved in the communication. Each com-
puter involves with only one link; each router involves with only two links. As Figure 2.10
shows, the journey of bits between computer A and computer B is made of four indepen-
dent short trips. Computer A sends each bit to router R1 in the format of the protocol used
by link 1. Router 1 sends each bit to router R3 in the format dictated by the protocol used
by link 3. And so on. Router R1 has two three physical layers (two are shown in our sce-
nario). The layer connected to link 1 receives bits according to the format of the protocol
Figure 2.9 A private internet
Link 1
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
31
used by link 1; the layer connected to link 3 sends bits according to the format of the proto-
col used by link 3. It is the same situation with the other two routers involved in the
communication.
The responsibility of the physical layer, in addition to delivery of bits, matches
with what mentioned for the physical layer of the OSI model, but it mostly depends on
the underlying technologies that provide links. We see in the next chapter that they are,
for example, many protocols for the physical layer of LANs or WANs.
Data Link Layer
TCP/IP does not define any specific protocol for the data link layer either. It supports
all of the standard and proprietary protocols. At this level, the communication is also
between two hops or nodes. The unit of communication however, is a packet called a
frame
. A frame is a packet that encapsulates the data received from the network layer
with an added header and sometimes a trailer. The head, among other communication
information, includes the source and destination of frame. The destination address is
needed to define the right recipient of the frame because many nodes may have been
connected to the link. The source address is needed for possible response or acknowl-
edgment as may be required by some protocols. Figure 2.11 shows the communication
at the data link layer.
Note that the frame that is travelling between computer A and router R1 may be
different from the one travelling between router R1 and R3. When the frame is received
by router R1, this router passes the frame to the data link layer protocol shown at the
left. The frame is opened, the data are removed. The data are then passed to the data
Figure 2.10
Communication at the physical layer
The unit of communication at the physical layer is a bit.
A
Physical
layer
Physical
layer
R1 R3 R4 B
Link 3 Link 5 Link 6 Link 1
Link 1
011 ... 101
011 ... 101
011 . 101
Source Destination Legend
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
011 ... 101
32 PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
link layer protocol shown at the right to create a new frame to be sent to the router R3.
The reason is that the two links, link 1 and link 3, may be using different protocols and
require frames of different formats. Note also that the figure does not show the physical
movement of frames; the physical movement happens only at the physical layer. The
two nodes communicate logically at the data link layer, not physically. In other words,
the data link layer at router R1 only thinks that a frame has been sent directly from the
data link layer at computer A. What is sent from A to R1 is a stream of bits from one
physical layer to another. Since a frame at A is transformed to a stream of bits, and the
bits at R1 are transformed to a frame, it gives this impression to the two data link layer
that a frame has been exchanged.
Network Layer
At the network layer (or, more accurately, the internetwork layer), TCP/IP supports the
Internet Protocol (IP). The Internet Protocol (IP) is the transmission mechanism used
by the TCP/IP protocols. IP transports data in packets called datagrams, each of which
is transported separately. Datagrams can travel along different routes and can arrive out
of sequence or be duplicated. IP does not keep track of the routes and has no facility for
reordering datagrams once they arrive at their destination. Figure 2.12 shows the com-
munication at the network layer.
Note that there is a main difference between the communication at the network
layer and the communication at data link or physical layers. Communication at the
Figure 2.11 Communication at the data link layer
The unit of communication at the data link layer is a frame.
A
Physical Physical
Data link Data link
R1 R3 R4 B
Link 3 Link 5 Link 6 Link 1
Frame
Frame
Frame
D2 H2
D2 H2
Frame
D2 H2
Source Destination Data D Header H Legend
Link 1
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
D2 H2
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE
33
network layer is end to end while the communication at the other two layers are node to
node. The datagram started at computer A is the one that reaches computer B. The net-
work layers of the routers can inspect the source and destination of the packet for find-
ing the best route, but they are not allowed to change the contents of the packet. Of
course, the communication is logical, not physical. Although the network layer of com-
puter A and B
think
that
they are sending and receiving datagrams, the actual communi-
cation again is done at the physical level.
Transport Layer
There is a main difference between the transport layer and the network layer.
Although all nodes in a network need to have the network layer, only the two end
computers need to have the transport layer. The network layer is responsible for send-
ing individual datagrams from computer A to computer B; the transport layer is
responsible for delivering the whole message, which is called a segment, a user data-
gram, or a packet, from A to B. A segment may consist of a few or tens of datagrams.
The segments need to be broken into datagrams and each datagram has to be deliv-
ered to the network layer for transmission. Since the Internet defines a different route
for each datagram, the datagrams may arrive out of order and may be lost. The trans-
port layer at computer B needs to wait until all of these datagrams to arrive, assemble
Figure 2.12
Communication at the network layer
The unit of communication at the network layer is a datagram.
A
Physical Physical
Data link Data link
R1 R3 R4 B
Network Network
Datagram
D3 H3
Datagram
D3 H3
Source Destination Data D Header H Legend
Link 1
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
34
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES
them and make a segment out of them. Figure 2.13 shows the communication at the
transport layer.
Again, we should know that the two transport layers only think that they are com-
municating with each other using a segment; the communication is done through the
physical layer and the exchange of bits.
Traditionally, the transport layer was represented in the TCP/IP suite by two proto-
cols:
User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
and
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
. A
new protocol called
Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
has been intro-
duced in the last few years.
Application Layer
The application layer in TCP/IP is equivalent to the combined session, presentation, and
application layers in the OSI model. The application layer allows a user to access the ser-
vices of our private internet or the global Internet. Many protocols are defined at this layer
to provide services such as electronic mail, file transfer, accessing the World Wide Web,
and so on. We cover most of the standard protocols in later chapters. Figure 2.14 shows
the communication at the application layer.
Figure 2.13
Communication at the transport layer
The unit of communication at the transport layer is a segment, user datagram, or a
packet, depending on the specific protocol used in this layer.
A
Physical Physical
Data link Data link
R1 R3 R4
B
Network Network
Transport Transport
Segment
D4 H4
Segment
D4 H4
Source Destination Data D Header H Legend
Link 1
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
CHAPTER 2 THE OSI MODEL AND THE TCP/IP PROTOCOL SUITE 35
Note that the communication at the application layer, like the one at the transport
layer, is end to end. A message generated at computer A is sent to computer B without
being changed during the transmission.
2.4 ADDRESSING
Four levels of addresses are used in an internet employing the TCP/IP protocols: phys-
ical address, logical address, port address, and application-specific address. Each
address is related to a one layer in the TCP/IP architecture, as shown in Figure 2.15.
Physical Addresses
The physical address, also known as the link address, is the address of a node as defined
by its LAN or WAN. It is included in the frame used by the data link layer. It is the
lowest-level address. The physical addresses have authority over the link (LAN or
WAN). The size and format of these addresses vary depending on the network. For
example, Ethernet uses a 6-byte (48-bit) physical address that is imprinted on the net-
work interface card (NIC). LocalTalk (Apple), however, has a 1-byte dynamic address
that changes each time the station comes up.
Figure 2.14 Communication at the application layer
The unit of communication at the application layer is a message.
A
Physical Physical
Data link Data link
R1 R3 R4
B
Network Network
Transport Transport
Application Application
Message
D5 D5
D5 D5
Message
Source Destination Data D Header H Legend
Link 1
A
R1
R2
R3
R4
B
Link 2
Link 3
Link 5
Link 4
Link 6
36
PART 1 INTRODUCTION AND UNDERLYING TECHNOLOGIES